I HAD always thought Jack Gisburn rather a cheap genius--though a good fellow enough--so it was no great surprise to me to hear that, in the height of his success, he had dropped his painting, married a rich widow, and established himself in a villa on the Riviera. (I call it his success advisedly, for it was the fashion to think, for the moment, that he was a very big man.)

I remember that I was not surprised--that I said to myself, in the slang of the club: 'Gisburn's gone under; he'll never do any more good work.'

And the odd thing was that I was right. The man who had painted 'The Judgment of Paris' and 'The Descent from the Cross' (both in the National Gallery) was not going to do any more work. I met him a year or two later, at a country house, and asked him if he painted.

'No,' he said; 'I have given it up.'

'Why?' I asked.

'Because I don't believe in it any more.'

'You don't believe in painting?'

'No--I don't believe in the whole business. I don't believe there's any use in painting pictures, or in writing books, or in doing anything whatever, except to make money.'

He was a remarkable man, was Jack Gisburn. He had painted great pictures and he had talked about them with a knowledge that showed he really understood the business. And then, at the height of his fame, he had thrown it all over, married a rich widow, and gone to live on the Riviera.

'What do you do all day?' I asked him.

'Oh, I loaf about,' he said. 'I play golf, I play bridge, I read the morning papers, I write to the evening papers, and in the evening I sit on the terrace of the casino and watch the people come in to gamble.'

'But you used to be so keen on your work,' I said.

'I was keen on the success,' he corrected me. 'I was never keen on the work. I liked the feeling of being praised, of being talked about, of being thought a big man. But the work itself--the grinding, the fumbling, the endless experimenting--I never liked it. I was always a lazy devil, and when I found that I could get the same satisfaction with a lot less trouble by marrying a rich widow, I took the easy way.'

'Then you never cared for painting at all?'

'Oh, I cared for it enough to do good work when I was pushed. But I never loved it. I loved the success, the applause, the fame. But the work itself--I never really cared for that.'

He spoke with a kind of cynical frankness that was half amusing, half depressing. I looked at him--a big, loose-limbed man, with a face that had once been handsome but was now beginning to show the effects of too much good living.

'You know,' he went on, 'I've always thought that most of us artists are really humbugs. We pretend that we care for art, when what we really care for is success. We pretend that we love our work, when what we really love is the applause.'

'But,' I said, 'there must be some artists who really love their work.'

'Oh, I dare say there are. But they're the exceptions. Most of us are really humbugs. We pretend to care for art when what we really care for is making a splash in the papers.'

I left him that evening with a kind of sadness. Here was a man who had had real talent, real ability, and who had thrown it all away because he didn't care enough for the work itself to go on with it when the going got hard.

I thought of another man I had known--a small, quiet, unassuming man, with no great talent, but with a passion for his work that had carried him through years of neglect and failure. He had painted pictures that nobody wanted, written books that nobody read, but he had gone on painting and writing because he loved the work itself.

And I wondered which of the two was the real artist--the man who painted for applause or the man who painted for love.